docs: Add v2021.1 release notes (#2230)
freifunk-gluon/gluon: docs/releases/v2021.1.rst

Gluon 2021.1
============

Important notes
---------------

Upgrades to v2021.1 and later releases are only supported from releases v2018.2 and later. This is due to migrations that have been removed to simplify maintenance.

Added hardware support
----------------------

ath79-generic
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Plasma Cloud

    - PA300 [#outdoor]_
    - PA300E [#outdoor]_

* TP-Link

    - Archer C2 v3
    - Archer D50 v1

ipq40xx-generic
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* AVM

    - FRITZ!Box 7530

* Plasma Cloud

    - PA1200 [#outdoor]_
    - PA2200

ramips-mt7620
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Netgear

    - EX3700
    - EX3800

.. [#outdoor]
  This device is supposed to be set up outdoors and will therefore have its outdoor mode flag automatically enabled.

Major changes
-------------

Multicast optimizations (batman-adv)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> In this release, we reenable the multicast optimizations, that have gone through another round of bug squashing upstream. This reduces layer 2 overhead, especially for IPv6 neighbor discover, because multicast traffic will be converted to unicast traffic when the number of subscribers does not exceed 16. This is beneficial as we would previously drop multicast traffic that wasn't explicitly allowed but now can allow multicast traffic if it wouldn't result in broadcast.

Reviewer: neighbor discovery - with a y ?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this release, we reenable the multicast optimizations, that have gone through another round of bug squashing upstream. This reduces layer 2 overhead, especially for IPv6 neighbor discovery, because multicast traffic will be converted to unicast traffic when the number of subscribers does not exceed 16. This is beneficial as we would previously drop multicast traffic that wasn't explicitly allowed but now can allow multicast traffic if it wouldn't result in broadcast.
```

@rotanid In case you didn't know yet: Github now has "suggestions" ^. With one button, they can be accepted or denied. They are easy to use: Just click the ± button in the editor (left of bold, italics, ...). The appearing suggestion can then directly be reformulated, without using any "patch" syntax.

> In this release, we reenable the multicast optimizations, that have gone through another round of bug squashing upstream. This reduces layer 2 overhead, especially for IPv6 neighbor discovery, because multicast traffic will be converted to unicast traffic when the number of subscribers does not exceed 16. This is beneficial as we would previously drop multicast traffic that wasn't explicitly allowed but now can allow multicast traffic if it wouldn't result in broadcast.

Author: https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/commit/05199e7e333b0d232f4b2a5ef0e54700e1a5e1d2

Status page
~~~~~~~~~~~

The status page has received much attention in this release and now exposes many more details that help to understand a node's setup remotely.

Among other things, we now expose wireless client count per radio, the mac80211 identifiers, the frequencies radios are tuned to, as well as information about the VPN provider and details on the mesh protocol stack.

gluon-switch-domain utility
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The ``gluon-switch-domain`` utility has been introduced to allow for a standard way to encapsulate the steps required for safely switching between domains. Existing packages liked the hoodselector and the scheduled-domain-switch have been tied in with gluon-switch-domain.

Reviewer: liked --> like

> It has an experimental ``--no-reboot`` flag, that requires further testing, to ensure it doesn't accidentally bridge separate domains.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It has an experimental ``--no-reboot`` flag that requires further testing to ensure it doesn't accidentally bridge separate domains.
```

Author: Applied.

Other changes
-------------

- The private WLAN interface is now assigned the interface name `wan_radioX` where X is the phy index.
- Linux kernel has been updated to 4.14.235
- The kernel's mac80211 stack has been updated to 4.19.193-test1 to mitigate the `FragAttacks <https://www.fragattacks.com/>`_ vulnerabilities
- OpenSSL has been updated to 1.1.1k, fixing CVE-2021-3449 and CVE-2021-3450
- Dropbear has been patched against mishandling of special filenames in its scp component (CVE-2020-36524)

Bugfixes
--------

> - The firmware partition lookup in gluon-web-admin's firmware update page was using an old partition label and therefore failed to look up the available flash size. This resulted in misleading error messages in case the uploaded firmware file exceed the flash size.

Reviewer: exceed -> exceeds ?

Gluon 2021.1
============

Important notes
---------------

> Upgrades to v2021.1 and later releases are only supported from releases v2018.2 and later. This is due migrations that have been removed to simplify maintenance.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Upgrades to v2021.1 and later releases are only supported from releases v2018.2 and later. This is due to migrations that have been removed to simplify maintenance.
```

Added hardware support
----------------------

ath79-generic
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Plasma Cloud

    - PA300 [#outdoor]_
    - PA300E [#outdoor]_

* TP-Link

    - Archer C2 v3
    - Archer D50 v1

ipq40xx-generic
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* AVM

    - FRITZ!Box 7530

* Plasma Cloud

    - PA1200 [#outdoor]_
    - PA2200

ramips-mt7620
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Netgear

    - EX3700
    - EX3800

.. [#outdoor]
  This device is supposed to be set up outdoors and will therefore have its outdoor mode flag automatically enabled.

Major changes
-------------

Multicast optimizations (batman-adv)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> In this release we reenable the multicast optimizations, that have gone through another round of bug squashing upstream. This allows, together with the ``noflood`` patchset, that multicast traffic will be converted to unicast traffic, when the number of subscribers does not exceed 16. This is beneficial as we would previously drop multicast traffic that wasn't explicitly allowed, but now can allow multicast traffic if it wouldn't result in broadcast.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In this release, we reenable the multicast optimizations, that have gone through another round of bug squashing upstream. This allows, together with the ``noflood`` patchset, that multicast traffic will be converted to unicast traffic when the number of subscribers does not exceed 16. This is beneficial as we would previously drop multicast traffic that wasn't explicitly allowed but now can allow multicast traffic if it wouldn't result in broadcast.
```

Reviewer 5: Next to @kaechele's suggestion, I'd propose to add a note regarding the impact on layer 2 overhead (which was the primary goal of this feature for the Gluon use-case):

> In this release, we reenable the multicast optimizations, that have gone through another round of bug squashing upstream. For one thing this reduces layer 2 overhead, especially for IPv6 Neighbor Discovery ("ARP" for IPv6). For another this allows, together with the ``noflood`` patchset, [...]

Status page
~~~~~~~~~~~

> The status page has received much attention this release and now exposes many more details that help understand a nodes setup remotely.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The status page has received much attention in this release and now exposes many more details that help to understand a nodes setup remotely.
```

> The status page has received much attention this release and now exposes many more details that help understand a nodes setup remotely.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The status page has received much attention this release and now exposes many more details that help understand a node's set up remotely.
```

> Among other things we now expose wireless client count per radio, mac80211 identifiers and the frequencies radios are tuned into, as well as information about the VPN provider and details on the mesh protocol stack.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Among other things, we now expose wireless client count per radio, the mac80211 identifiers and the frequencies the radios tuned to, as well as information about the VPN provider and details on the mesh protocol stack.
```

Reviewer 2: Mhm. Most of this is not very necessary. I'll stop here. Drop them, if you don't like them.

Author: Happy to accept those kinds of changes. They make the whole thing a better read.

> Mesh-VPN Abstraction Layer

Author: Good point, thanks!

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The ``gluon-switch-domain`` utility has been introduced to allow for a standard way to encapsulate the steps required for safely switching between domains. Existing packcages liked the hoodselector and the scheduled-domain-switch have been tied in with gluon-switch-domain.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The ``gluon-switch-domain`` utility has been introduced to allow for a standard way to encapsulate the steps required for safely switching between domains. Existing packages liked the hoodselector and the scheduled-domain-switch have been tied in with gluon-switch-domain.
```

> It has an experimental ``--no-reboot`` flag, that requires further testing, in order to ensure it doesn't accidentally bridge separate domains.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
It has an experimental ``--no-reboot`` flag, that requires further testing, to ensure it doesn't accidentally bridge separate domains.
```

Other changes
-------------

- The private WLAN interface is now assigned the interface name `wan_radioX` where X is the phy index.
- Linux kernel has been updated to 4.14.235

> - The kernels mac80211 stack has been updated to 4.19.193-test1 to mitigate the `FragAttacks <https://www.fragattacks.com/>`_ vulnerabilities

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- The kernel's mac80211 stack has been updated to 4.19.193-test1 to mitigate the `FragAttacks <https://www.fragattacks.com/>`_ vulnerabilities
```

- OpenSSL has been updated to 1.1.1k, fixing CVE-2021-3449 and CVE-2021-3450
- Dropbear has been patched against mishandling of special filenames in its scp component (CVE-2020-36524)

Bugfixes
--------

> - The firmware partition lookup in gluon-web-admin's firmware update page was using an old partition label, and therefore failed to lookup the available flash size. This gave misleading error messages in case the uploaded firmware exceed the flash size.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- The firmware partition lookup in gluon-web-admin's firmware update page was using an old partition label and therefore failed to look up the available flash size. This resulted in misleading error messages in case the uploaded firmware file exceed the flash size.
```

- Android 9 and higher do not properly wake up to renew their MLD subscriptions, therefore dropping out of the Neighbor Discovery MLD group, which leads to broken IPv6 connectivity after the device has slept for a while. A workaround has been deployed to wake these devices up in regular intervals to prevent this regression.

Internal
--------

Mesh-VPN Abstraction Layer
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> In preparation for the introduction of new tunneling protocols the gluon-mesh-vpn framework has been modularized. This allows for providers to use a standard interface and keep their implementation details in a dedicated package.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In preparation for the introduction of new tunneling protocols, the gluon-mesh-vpn framework has been modularized. This allows for providers to use a standard interface and keep their implementation details in a dedicated package.
```
